
Robert William Gary Moore (4 April 1952[1] – 6 February 2011) was a Northern Irish rock guitarist and singer-songwriter.
Beginning in the 1960s, Moore played with Phil Lynott and Brian Downey during his teenage years, leading him to memberships of the Irish bands Skid Row and Thin Lizzy, and British band Colosseum II. Moore shared the stage with such blues and rock musicians as B.B. King, Albert King, John Mayall, Jack Bruce, Albert Collins, George Harrison, and Greg Lake, as well as having a solo career.
Moore grew up on Castleview Road opposite Stormont Parliament Buildings, off the Upper Newtownards Road in east Belfast, as one of five children of Bobby, a promoter, and Winnie, a housewife. He left the city as a teenager, because of troubles in his family – his parents parted a year later – just as The Troubles were starting in Northern Ireland.[2]
Moore picked up a battered acoustic guitar at the age of ten. He started performing at a young age, making his live debut in a school band, during the intermission of one of his father's promoted shows. He got his first quality guitar (a Fender Telecaster) at the age of 14, and learned to play the right-handed instrument in the standard way, despite being left-handed.
In 1968, after performing with a number of Belfast-based bands, Gary Moore, at the age of 16, was "headhunted" as the replacement guitarist in the Dublin-based band Skid Row and he moved to Dublin. Moore's greatest influence in the early days was English guitarist Peter Green of Fleetwood Mac who was a mentor to Moore when performing in Dublin.
Other early musical influences were artists such as Albert King, Elvis Presley, The Shadows, Buddy Guy and The Beatles. Later, having seen Jimi Hendrix, Roy Buchanan and John Mayall's Bluesbreakers in his home town of Belfast, his own style was developing into a blues-rock sound that would be the dominant form of his career in music.
After joining the group Skid Row with Noel Bridgeman and Brendan "Brush" Shiels, in mid 1968, cutting a number of singles and an album, released in 1970, Skid Row then went on to play shows across Europe and the USA, opening for a number of high-profile bands. It was with this group that Gary Moore earned a reputation in the music industry, and his association with Phil Lynott began. Moore left the band in December 1971.[3]
In 1970, Moore moved to England and remained there, apart from two short periods in the United States. In 1973, under the name "The Gary Moore Band", he released his first solo album, Grinding Stone. "Grinding Stone" was issued in North America on Neil Kempfer-Stocker's fledgling record label imprint Cosmos and received "Album of the Year" accolades on KTAC-FM/Seattle-Tacoma, Washington, in 1974.[citation needed]
In 1974 he re-joined Lynott, when he first joined Thin Lizzy after the departure of founding member Eric Bell.[citation needed]
From 1975 to August 1978, he was a member of Colosseum II. With that band, he also collaborated with Andrew Lloyd Webber on the composer's Variations album in 1978.[citation needed]
In 1977, Moore re-joined Thin Lizzy, first as a temporary replacement for Brian Robertson, and on a permanent basis a year later.[citation needed]
Between late 1977 and early 1978 while moving from Colosseum II and a future return to the ranks of Thin Lizzy, Gary Moore recorded the album Back on the Streets, featuring the hit single "Parisienne Walkways" which reached the Top Ten in the UK Singles Chart in April 1979. While Back on the Streets was climbing the charts, Gary Moore had joined Thin Lizzy on a more permanent basis. Recording the album Black Rose: A Rock Legend, which reached number two in the UK album chart. Moore appears in the videos for "Waiting for an Alibi", "With Love" and "Do Anything You Want To".
In July 1979, he left Thin Lizzy permanently to focus on a possible solo career, but went on to form the short lived band G-Force recording an album for Jet Records. A couple of other albums were made at this time, but not released until after Gary had signed to, and found some success with Virgin Records in 1982, and had released the album Corridors of Power.
Prior to the recording of Corridors of Power, Gary had joined Greg Lake to help finish the recording of his first solo record Greg Lake after the demise of Emerson, Lake and Palmer. Gary toured with the Greg Lake band and recorded a second Greg Lake solo record, but didn't tour it. A number of hard rock albums were released during the 1980s, with which Gary became disillusioned after the release of After the War, prompting the recording of the album,Still Got the Blues,  in 1990.
He experimented with many musical genres, including rock, jazz, blues, country, electric blues, hard rock, and heavy metal.[4]
In 1987, he performed a guitar solo for a cover of the Beatles' "Let It Be", which was released under the group-name of Ferry Aid. The record raised substantial funds for the survivors of the MS Herald of Free Enterprise disaster. In 1990, he played the lead guitar solo on "She's My Baby" from Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3.
Released in March 1990, Still Got the Blues, with contributions from Albert King, Albert Collins, and George Harrison, saw Gary Moore returning to the musical form that had inspired him in his early days in Belfast. The album was well received by fans and was certified Gold in the U.S. Peter Green's continued influence on Moore was repaid as a tribute to Green on his 1995 album Blues for Greeny, an album consisting entirely of Green compositions. On this tribute album, Moore played Green's 1959 Les Paul Standard guitar that Green had lent to Moore after leaving Fleetwood Mac. Moore ultimately purchased the guitar, at Green's request, so that "it would have a good home".[5] 
Moore stayed with the blues format until 1997. He returned to rock, but with a softer, more pop and ballad-oriented sound on Dark Days in Paradise,  followed with another change of direction in 1999, when he decided to experiment with modern dance beats on A Different Beat; this left many fans, as well as the music press, confused.
In 2001 with Back to the Blues, Moore returned to his tried and tested blues format: he continued with this style on Power of the Blues (2004), Old New Ballads Blues (2006), Close As You Get (2007), and Bad For You Baby (2008).
In January 2005, Moore joined the One World Project, which recorded a song for the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami relief effort. The group featured Russell Watson, Boy George, Steve Winwood, Barry Gibb, Brian Wilson, Cliff Richard, Dewey Bunnell, Gerry Beckley, and Robin Gibb on vocals (in their order of appearance), and featured a guitar solo by Moore. The song, entitled Grief Never Grows Old, was released in February 2005, reaching No. 4 on the UK Singles Chart.[6]
He also took part in a comedy skit on French and Saunders entitled "The Easy Guitar Book Sketch" with comedian Rowland Rivron and fellow musicians Mark Knopfler, Lemmy from Motörhead, Mark King from Level 42, and David Gilmour from Pink Floyd.[7][8]
Other collaborations included a broad range of artists including Trilok Gurtu, Dr. Strangely Strange, Jimmy Nail, Mo Foster, Ginger Baker, Jack Bruce, Jim Capaldi, B.B. King, Vicki Brown, Cozy Powell, Rod Argent, the Beach Boys, Paul Rodgers, Keith Emerson, Roger Daltrey, and Otis Taylor.
During a relationship in the late 60´s while he was with Skid Row, his eldest daughter, Saoirse was born.
He was married from 1985 to 1993 and had two sons, Jack and Gus.
Since 1997, he was living with his partner, an artist named Jo, and their daughter Lily (b. 1998). 
At the time of his death, he lived in  Vallance Gardens, Hove, East Sussex.[9]
Gary Moore died of a heart attack in his sleep at the age of 58 during the early hours of 6 February 2011. At the time, he was on holiday with his girlfriend at the Kempinski Hotel in Estepona, Spain. After a quiet dinner, they went for a walk on the beach before going up to their room. His girlfriend raised the alarm at 4:00 am, and tried to give him a heart massage. His death was confirmed by Thin Lizzy's manager, Adam Parsons.[3][10]
According to The Daily Telegraph, Moore's fatal heart attack was brought on by a massive amount of alcohol he had consumed the evening of his death. Moore had 380 mg of alcohol per decilitre (100 millilitres) of blood (0.38%) in his system.[11] Blood alcohol content from 0.40% to 0.50% is considered to be lethal.[12]
Gary Moore's eldest son Jack, alongside his uncle Cliff Moore, performed the traditional song "Danny Boy" at his father's funeral.[13] This was reported in the Belfast Telegraph as a flawless tribute at which some mourners in the church wept openly. Moore was buried at St Margaret's Churchyard, Rottingdean, East Sussex, England, in a private ceremony, with only the family and close friends in attendance.
Moore was very popular in Western Europe, Scandinavia, Eastern Europe and Japan, but less successful in the US.[14] Throughout his career, Moore was recognised as an influence by many notable guitarists including Martin Barre,[15] Vivian Campbell,[16] Patrick Rondat,[17] John Norum, Paul Gilbert,[18] Gus G, Slash, Orianthi, Joe Bonamassa, Adrian Smith, Phil Collen, George Lynch, Doug Aldrich, Jake E. Lee, Zakk Wylde,[19] Randy Rhoads, John Sykes, Henrik Freischlader, Janick Gers, Gary W Suede, and Kirk Hammett.[20]
Since his death, many fellow musicians have commented on Gary Moore's talents including Ozzy Osbourne,[21] Kirk Hammett,[22] Eric Singer,[23] Matthew Edward Hall, Doug Aldrich,[24] Tony Iommi,[25] Bob Geldof,[26] Roger Taylor,[27] Brian May,[28] Brian Downey,[29][30] Andy DiGelsomina,[31] Ricky Warwick,[32] Glenn Hughes, Bryan Adams, Henry Rollins, Scott Gorham,[33] Ignacio Garay,[34] and Mikael Åkerfeldt.[35] On 18 April 2011, a number of musicians including Eric Bell and Brian Downey, Thunder rising, Silverbird and The Business blues band gathered for a tribute concert in Whelan's bar in Dublin, Ireland titled 'The Gig For Gary'.[36]
In March 2011 Guitarist produced a tribute special with unreleased footage from 2009. Twitter was flooded with tributes from fans for several days after his death.[37]
A large statue of Moore was erected on a small island outside Skånevik, following his many performances at the Skånevik Blues Festival. The statue still stands as of July 2013.
In April 2017 Henrik Freischlader released a tribute album titled Blues For Gary featuring Pete Rees and Vic Martin.
Jack Moore performed a tribute on his guitar, that had belonged to his father, alongside Danny Young in the form of a music video around the anniversary of his father's birthday, in April 2017.[38][39][40] The song was named Phoenix, which was written and performed by both Jack Moore and Danny Young.
Moore was associated with many guitar brands over his career, but the guitar he was most associated with was the Gibson Les Paul. Moore's 1959 Les Paul Standard guitar was famed for its distinctive out-of-phase sound attributed to a possible pickup repair, in which the magnet in the neck pickup had been flipped, causing the out-of-phase sound when combined with the bridge pickup. The guitar was originally owned by Peter Green. Green sold the guitar to his younger friend Moore in 1974 for the price that Moore got from selling a Gibson SG, his main guitar at that time. Moore used the guitar extensively over the next 30-plus years, on hits such as Parisienne Walkways, which was his best-known song. The guitar is now owned by Metallica guitarist Kirk Hammett who purchased the guitar, a number of years after Gary had sold it, for an undisclosed amount (supposedly $2 million US).[41][42]
Another guitar Moore was associated with was a red 1961 Fender Stratocaster, which Moore had purchased in 1981. The guitar was almost sold to Greg Lake, ex of Emerson, Lake and Palmer,[43][better source needed] who was originally viewing the guitar, but Moore had tried it out and liked the sound of the guitar acoustically. Lake passed on the guitar as it was not in pristine condition, and so Moore made a deal. The Red Strat, also known as the Pink Strat, was extensively used by Moore on Corridors of Power along with many other recording sessions, over the years. The Red Strat was seen on many live performances, most notably at the Fender 50th Anniversary show held at Wembley Arena, North London, in 2004 when Moore performed Jimi Hendrix's"Red House". The neck pickup was rewound by pickup maker Seymour Duncan in 1998. Fender Guitars launched a custom shop tribute replica of the Red Strat, in 2016, which was undertaken by Fender master builder John Cruz.[44][45][46][47]
